docs: Vega ES|QL data sources respect the dashboard time range (#7620) (#7678)
elastic/docs-content: explore-analyze/visualize/custom-visualizations-with-vega.md

| `"%timefield%"` | The timestamp field to use for the dashboard time range. See [Apply the dashboard time range](#vega-esql-time-range). |
| `"dropNullColumns"` | Defaults to `true`. When `true`, columns that contain only `null` values are excluded from the response. |
| `"params"` | An array of named parameter objects to substitute into the query. |

The response is converted from the {{esql}} columnar format into the row-based format that **Vega** expects, with one object per row keyed by column name.

{applies_to}`stack: preview 9.5` {applies_to}`serverless: preview` **Vega** and **Vega-Lite** panels that use an {{esql}} data source are subject to the {icon}`bolt` [**Fast mode**](../query-filter/languages/esql-kibana.md#approximation-fast-mode) dashboard option. When this option is active on a dashboard, these panels return faster, estimated results for `STATS` aggregations.

#### Apply the dashboard time range to {{esql}} data sources [vega-esql-time-range]
```{applies_to}
stack: ga 9.4
serverless: ga
```

How the dashboard time range reaches an {{esql}} data source depends on your version.

:::::{applies-switch}

::::{applies-item} { stack: ga 9.5+, serverless: ga }

> {{kib}} applies the dashboard time range automatically, the same way it does in Lens and Discover. By default, it looks for a field named `@timestamp` in your data and filters on it, so no configuration is needed when your time field has that name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{kib}} applies the dashboard time range automatically, the same way it does in Lens and Discover. By default, it looks for and filters on the `@timestamp` field, so no configuration is needed when your time field is named `@timestamp`.
```

> To filter on a different date field, specify it in one of the following ways:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To filter on a different time field, specify it in one of the following ways:
```
just for consistency with the paragraph preceding this line.

* Set `"%timefield%"` to the field. No `WHERE` clause is required in the query.
* Compare the field against `?_tstart` and `?_tend` in the query, for example in a `WHERE` clause.

> If your data has no `@timestamp` field and you don't specify one, the query isn't filtered by time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your data has no `@timestamp` field and you don't specify a different time field, the query isn't filtered by time.
```

    }
  },
  "mark": { "type": "text", "fontSize": 48 },
  "encoding": { "text": { "field": "count", "type": "quantitative" } }
}
```

1. No `WHERE` clause, `?_tstart` or `?_tend` parameters, or `"%timefield%"` are needed. {{kib}} filters on `@timestamp` automatically.
::::

::::{applies-item} { stack: ga =9.4 }
{{kib}} applies the dashboard time range only through the `?_tstart` and `?_tend` parameters. Reference your time field with these parameters in the query, for example in a `WHERE` clause, and set `"%timefield%"` to turn them on. {{kib}} replaces the parameters with the start and end of the time range. Both the parameters and `"%timefield%"` are required.

For example, this metric counts documents within the dashboard time range:

```json
{
  "$schema": "https://vega.github.io/schema/vega-lite/v6.json",
  "data": {
    "url": {
      "%type%": "esql",
      "%timefield%": "@timestamp", <1>
      "query": "FROM kibana_sample_data_logs | WHERE @timestamp >= ?_tstart AND @timestamp <= ?_tend | STATS count = COUNT(*)" <2>
    }
  },
  "mark": { "type": "text", "fontSize": 48 },
  "encoding": { "text": { "field": "count", "type": "quantitative" } }
}
```

> 1. Turns on the `?_tstart` and `?_tend` parameters. Set it to your time field so the spec keeps working in 9.5 and later.

Author: ```suggestion
1. Turns on the `?_tstart` and `?_tend` parameters. Set it to your time field so the spec keeps working in later versions.
```
